---
title: On Being the Right Size
author: J. B. S. Haldane
date: March 1926
...

The most obvious differences between different animals are differences of size,
but for some reason the zoologists have paid singularly little attention to
them. In a large textbook of zoology before me I find no indication that the
eagle is larger than the sparrow, or the hippopotamus bigger than the hare,
though some grudging admissions are made in the case of the mouse and the whale.
But yet it is easy to show that a hare could not be as large as a hippopotamus
or a whale as small as a herring. For every type of animal there is a most
convenient size, and a large change in size inevitably carries with it a change
of form.

Let us take the most obvious of possible cases, and consider a giant man sixty
feet high -- about the height of Giant Pope and Giant Pagan in the illustrated
Pilgrimâ€™s Progress of my childhood. These monsters were not only ten times as
high as Christian, but ten times as wide and ten times as thick, so that their
total weight was a thousand times his, or about eighty to ninety tons.
Unfortunately the cross sections of their bones were only a hundred times those
of Christian, so that every square inch of giant bone had to support ten times
the weight borne by a square inch of human bone.  As the human thigh-bone breaks
under about ten times the human weight, Pope and Pagan would have broken their
thighs every time they took a step.  This was doubtless why they were sitting
down in the picture I remember.  But it lessens ones respect for Christian and
Jack the Giant Killer.

To turn to zoology, suppose that a gazelle, a graceful little creature with long
thin legs, is to become large, it will break its bones unless it does one of two
things. It may make its legs short and thick, like the rhinoceros, so that every
pound of weight has still about the same area of bone to support it. Or it can
compress its body and stretch out its legs obliquely to gain stability, like the
giraffe. I mention these two beasts because they happen to belong to the same
order as the gazelle, and both are quite successful mechanically, being
remarkably fast runners.

Gravity, a mere nuisance to Christian, was a terror to Pope, Pagan, and Despair.
To the mouse and any smaller animal it presents practically no dangers. You can
drop a mouse down a thousand-yard mine shaft; and, on arriving at the bottom it
gets a slight shock and walks away, provided that the ground is fairly soft. A
rat is killed, a man is broken, a horse splashes.  For the resistance presented
to movement by the air is proportional to the surface of the moving object.
Divide an animal's length, breadth, and height each by ten; its weight is
reduced to a thousandth, but its surface only a hundredth. So the resistance to
falling in the case of the small animal is relatively ten times greater than the
driving force.

An insect, therefore, is not afraid of gravity; it can fall without danger, and
can cling to the ceiling with remarkably little trouble. It can go in for
elegant and fantastic forms of support like that of the daddy-longlegs.  But
there is a force which is as formidable to an insect as gravitation to a mammal.
This is surface tension. A man coming out of a bath carries with him a film of
water about one-fiftieth of an inch in thickness. This weighs roughly a pound. A
wet mouse has to carry about its own weight of water.  A wet fly has to lift
many times its own weight and, as everyone knows, a fly once wetted by water or
any other liquid is in a very serious position indeed.  An insect going for a
drink is in a great danger as man leaning out over a precipice in search of
food. If it once falls into the grip of the surface tension of the water -that
is to say, gets wet -- it is likely to remain so until it downs.  A few insects,
such as water-beetles, contrive to be unwettable; the majority keep well away
from their drink by means of a long proboscis.

Of course tall land animals have other difficulties. They have to pump their
blood to greater heights than a man, and, therefore, require a larger blood
pressure and tougher blood-vessels. A great many men die from burst arteries,
greater for an elephant or a giraffe. But animals of all kinds find difficulties
in size for the following reason. A typical small animal, say a microscopic worm
of rotifer, has a smooth skin through which all the oxygen it requires can soak
in, a straight gut with sufficient surface to absorb its food, and a single
kidney. Increase its dimensions tenfold in every direction, and its weight is
increased a thousand times, so that if it to use its muscles as efficiently as
its miniature counterpart, it will need a thousand times as much food and oxygen
per day and will excrete a thousand times as much of waste products.

Now if its shape is unaltered its surface will be increased only a hundredfold,
and ten times as much oxygen must enter per minute through each square
millimeter of skin, ten time as much food through each square millimeter of
intestine. When a limit is reached to their absorptive powers their surface has
to be increased by some special device. For example, a part of the skin may be
drawn out into tufts to make gills or pushed in to make lungs, thus increasing
the oxygen-absorbing surface in proportion to the animal's bulk. A man, for
example, has a hundred square yards of lung. Similarly, the gut, instead of
being smooth and straight, becomes coiled and develops a velvety surface, and
other organs increase in complication. The higher animals are not larger than
the lower because they are more complicated.  They are more complicated because
they are larger. Just the same is true of plants. The simplest plants, such as
the green algae growing in stagnant water or on the bark of trees, are mere
round cells. The higher plants increase their surface by putting out leaves and
roots. Comparative anatomy is largely the story of the struggle to example,
while vertebrates carry the oxygen from the gills or lungs all over the body in
the blood, insects take air directly to every part of their body by tiny blind
tubes called tracheae which open to the surface at many different points. Now,
although their breathing movements they can renew the air in the outer part of
the tracheal system, the oxygen has to penetrate the finer branches by means of
diffusion.  Gases can diffuse easily through very small distances, not many
times larger than the average length traveled by a gas molecule between
collisions with other molecules. But when such vast journeys-from the point of
view of a molecule-as a quarter of an inch have to be made, the process becomes
slow.  So the portions of an insect's body more than a quarter of an inch from
the air would always be short of oxygen. In consequence hardly any insects are
much more than half an inch thick. Land crabs are built on the same general plan
as insects, but are much clumsier. Yet like ourselves they carry oxygen around
in their blood, and are therefore able to grow far larger than any insects. If
the insects had hit on a plan for driving air through their tissues instead of
letting it soak in, they might well have become as large as lobsters, though
other considerations would have prevented them from becoming as large as man.

Exactly the same difficulties attach to flying. It is an elementary principle of
aeronautics that the minimum speed needed to keep an aeroplane of a given shape
in the air varies as the square root of its length. If its linear dimensions are
increased four times, it must fly twice as fast. Now the power needed for the
minimum speed increases more rapidly than the weight of the machine. So the
larger aeroplane, which weighs sixty-four times as much as the smaller, needs
one hundred and twenty-eight times its horsepower to keep up. Applying the same
principle to the birds, we find that the limit to their size is soon reached. An
angel whose muscles developed no more power weight for weight than those of an
eagle or a pigeon would require a breast projecting for about four feet to house
the muscles engaged in working its wings, while to economize in weight, its legs
would have to be reduced to mere stilts. Actually a large bird such as an eagle
or kite does not keep in the air mainly by moving its wings. It is generally to
be seen soaring, that is to say balanced on a rising column of air. And even
soaring becomes more and more difficult with increasing size. Were this not the
case eagles might be as large as tigers and as formidable to man as hostile
aeroplanes.

But it is time that we pass to some of the advantages of size. One of the most
obvious is that it enables one to keep warm. All warm-blooded animals at rest
lose the same amount of heat from a unit area of skin, for which purpose they
need a food-supply proportional to their surface and not to their weight. Five
thousand mice weigh as much as a man. Their combined surface and food or oxygen
consumption are about seventeen times a man's.  In fact a mouse eats about one
quarter its own weight of food every day, which is mainly used in keeping it
warm. For the same reason small animals cannot live in cold countries. In the
arctic regions there are no reptiles or amphibians, and no small mammals. The
smallest mammal in Spitzbergen is the fox. The small birds fly away in winter,
while the insects die, though their eggs can survive six months or more of
frost. The most successful mammals are bears, seals, and walruses.

Similarly, the eye is a rather inefficient organ until it reaches a large size.
The back of the human eye on which an image of the outside world is thrown, and
which corresponds to the film of a camera, is composed of a mosaic of "rods and
cones" whose diameter is little more than a length of an average light wave.
Each eye has about a half a million, and for two objects to be distinguishable
their images must fall on separate rods or cones. It is obvious that with fewer
but larger rods and cones we should see less distinctly. If they were twice as
broad two points would have to be twice as far apart before we could distinguish
them at a given distance. But if their size were diminished and their number
increased we should see no better. For it is impossible to form a definite image
smaller than a wave-length of light. Hence a mouse's eye is not a small-scale
model of a human eye. Its rods and cones are not much smaller than ours, and
therefore there are far fewer of them. A mouse could not distinguish one human
face from another six feet away. In order that they should be of any use at all
the eyes of small animals have to be much larger in proportion to their bodies
than our own. Large animals on the other hand only require relatively small
eyes, and those of the whale and elephant are little larger than our own. For
rather more recondite reasons the same general principle holds true of the
brain. If we compare the brainweights of a set of very similar animals such as
the cat, cheetah, leopard, and tiger, we find that as we quadruple the
body-weight the brain-weight is only doubled. The larger animal with
proportionately larger bones can economize on brain, eyes, and certain other
organs.

Such are a very few of the considerations which show that for every type of
animal there is an optimum size. Yet although Galileo demonstrated the contrary
more than three hundred years ago, people still believe that if a flea were as
large as a man it could jump a thousand feet into the air. As a matter of fact
the height to which an animal can jump is more nearly independent of its size
than proportional to it. A flea can jump about two feet, a man about five. To
jump a given height, if we neglect the resistance of air, requires an
expenditure of energy proportional to the jumper's weight.  But if the jumping
muscles form a constant fraction of the animal's body, the energy developed per
ounce of muscle is independent of the size, provided it can be developed quickly
enough in the small animal. As a matter of fact an insect's muscles, although
they can contract more quickly than our own, appear to be less efficient; as
otherwise a flea or grasshopper could rise six feet into the air.

And just as there is a best size for every animal, so the same is true for every
human institution. In the Greek type of democracy all the citizens could listen
to a series of orators and vote directly on questions of legislation. Hence
their philosophers held that a small city was the largest possible democratic
state. The English invention of representative government made a democratic
nation possible, and the possibility was first realized in the United States,
and later elsewhere. With the development of broadcasting it has once more
become possible for every citizen to listen to the political views of
representative orators, and the future may perhaps see the return of the
national state to the Greek form of democracy. Even the referendum has been made
possible only by the institution of daily newspapers.

To the biologist the problem of socialism appears largely as a problem of size.
The extreme socialists desire to run every nation as a single business concern.
I do not suppose that Henry Ford would find much difficulty in running Andorra
or Luxembourg on a socialistic basis. He has already more men on his pay-roll
than their population. It is conceivable that a syndicate of Fords, if we could
find them, would make Belgium Ltd or Denmark Inc.  pay their way. But while
nationalization of certain industries is an obvious possibility in the largest
of states, I find it no easier to picture a completely socialized British Empire
or United States than an elephant turning somersaults or a hippopotamus jumping
a hedge.

## About the Author

John Burdon Sanderson Haldane (November 5, 1892 -- December 1, 1964) was a
geneticist born in Scotland and educated at Eton and Oxford University.  He was
one of the founders (along with Fisher and Wright) of population genetics.

His famous book, The Causes of Evolution (1932), was the first major work of
what came to be known as the "modern evolutionary synthesis", reestablishing
natural selection as the premier mechanism of evolution by explaining it in
terms of the mathematical consequences of Mendelian genetics.  He was also a
great science popularizer, and was perhaps the Stephen Jay Gould or Richard
Dawkins of his day. His essay, Daedalus or Science and the Future (1923), was
remarkable in predicting many scientific advances but has been criticized for
presenting a too idealistic view of scientific progress.

Haldane was himself a very idealistic man, and in his youth was a devoted
Communist and author of many articles in The Daily Worker. Events in the Soviet
Union, such as the rise of the anti-Mendelian agronomist Trofim Lysenko and the
crimes of Stalin, caused him to break with the Communist Party later in life.

He is also known for an observation from his essay, On Being the Right Size,
which Jane Jacobs and others have since referred to as Haldane's principle. This
is that sheer size very often defines what bodily equipment an animal must have:
"Insects, being so small, do not have oxygen-carrying bloodstreams. What little
oxygen their cells require can be absorbed by simple diffusion of air through
their bodies. But being larger means an animal must take on complicated oxygen
pumping and distributing systems to reach all the cells." The conceptual
metaphor to animal body complexity has been of use in energy economics and
secession ideas.

Haldane was friends with the author Aldous Huxley, and was the basis for the
biologist Shearwater in Huxley's novel Antic Hay. Ideas from Haldaneâ€™s Daedalus,
such as ectogenesis (the development of fetuses in artificial wombs), also
influenced Huxley's Brave New World.

He had many students, the most famous of whom, John Maynard Smith, was perhaps
also the one most like himself.

In one of the last speeches of his life, Biological Possibilities for the Human
Species of the Next Ten Thousand Years (1963), Haldane coined the word "clone",
from the Greek word for twig.

Haldane was a very quotable man. Some of the things he said are probably more
famous than he is:

* The Creator, if He exists, has a special preference for beetles.
  This is referring to the fact that 25% of all known animal species
  are types of beetle.

* Four stages of acceptance:

    1. This is worthless nonsense.
    2. This is an interesting, but perverse, point of view.
    3. This is true, but quite unimportant.
    4. I always said so.

    This is referring to the stages that a scientific theory goes through.

* Now my own suspicion is that the Universe is not only queerer than we suppose,
  but queerer than we CAN suppose. Often referred to as "Haldane's Law"
  (not to be confused with Haldane's rule), this is an explanation for the
  increasing counterintuitiveness of modern scientific theories.

* Would I lay down my life to save my brother? No, but I would to
  save two brothers or eight cousins. This is a joke based on the idea of
  inclusive fitness. Basically, the joke is as you only share 50% of your genes
  with a brother, and 12.5% with a cousin, you would have to save enough
  relatives to at least break even.

It is worth mentioning, to those who are keen on books for their own sake, that
his most sought-after and valuable publication, as far as collectors are
concerned, is the short story My Friend Mr Leakey -- which indeed is where the
'queerer than we suppose' quotation can be found in print (though it is likely
that JBSH thought this one up beforehand and incorporated it in the story for
our amusement).

All text is available under the terms of the GNU Free Documentation License.

source: <http://www.phys.ufl.edu/courses/phy3221/spring10/HaldaneRightSize.pdf>
