# #2 Don’t Make Kids Learn Coding

Oct 12, 2021


About ten years ago I started a coding school for kids called Saturday
Kids, just as I was getting into angel investing. The idea back then was
to help kids become technical so it’ll be easier for them to launch
their own startups. So naive it’s laughable.

Ten years on I tell people Saturday Kids is a curiosity school for kids.
We still teach coding, but the goal isn’t to get kids technical.

## Coding is just a means to an end. Curiosity, imagination and empathy are far more important and valuable traits.

Writing code is just a means to an end - to build products that are
useful to people. The founders who are wildly successful are the ones
with the curiosity, imagination and empathy to figure out what is it
users want, often before users themselves can imagine what the product
might look like. Henry Ford’s faster horse is a favourite example.

### **Learning coding makes kids curious about how to create with technology.**

Over the last ten years we’ve taught thousands of kids coding at
Saturday Kids, and we’ve noticed how excited kids get when they start
building their own games and animations on Scratch. Kids are not excited
about writing code. They are excited about what they can build with
code. This is an important difference. Learning coding opens a world of
possibilities for kids and allows them to express themselves creatively.

### **Building stuff with code shows kids learning can be fun.**

Kids have a blast making their ideas come alive with code. Many kids
tell us it’s the most fun they have ever had in a classroom. We ask them
to remember learning can be fun and it is up to them to keep learning on
their own. Too much of learning in school is rote memorisation. We show
kids there is a different kind of learning that involves imagination and
problem solving in order to bring their ideas to the world.

Don’t make kids learn coding for coding’s sake. Make them learn coding
to inspire curiosity, spark imagination, and build something people
want.

<img src="https://firebasestorage.googleapis.com/v0/b/typeshare-2027d.appspot.com/o/7iW5QcM1FwOs9Skbg6vk5vTNdly2%2Fprofile-photo?alt=media&amp;token=ab480ade-8326-435b-99d9-73c85b223612" class="rounded-full w-16 h-16 bg-gradient-to-br from-indigo-400 to-orange-600 via-pink-500" />

Written by John Tan

Everyone remembers their favourite teacher. The teacher who made
learning fun. The teacher who believed in us. The teacher who inspired
us to become the person we are today. I founded Doyobi to help every
teacher become that teacher.

Read more by John Tan

<img src="data:image/svg+xml;base64,PHN2ZyB4bWxucz0iaHR0cDovL3d3dy53My5vcmcvMjAwMC9zdmciIHZpZXdib3g9IjAgMCAyMCAyMCIgZmlsbD0iY3VycmVudENvbG9yIiBhcmlhLWhpZGRlbj0idHJ1ZSIgY2xhc3M9InctNCBoLTQgdHJhbnNmb3JtIHRyYW5zbGF0ZS14LVstNHB4XSBncm91cC1ob3Zlcjp0cmFuc2xhdGUteC1bMC41cHhdIGR1cmF0aW9uLTIwMCI+PHBhdGggZmlsbC1ydWxlPSJldmVub2RkIiBkPSJNNy4yOTMgMTQuNzA3YTEgMSAwIDAxMC0xLjQxNEwxMC41ODYgMTAgNy4yOTMgNi43MDdhMSAxIDAgMDExLjQxNC0xLjQxNGw0IDRhMSAxIDAgMDEwIDEuNDE0bC00IDRhMSAxIDAgMDEtMS40MTQgMHoiIGNsaXAtcnVsZT0iZXZlbm9kZCI+PC9wYXRoPjwvc3ZnPg==" class="w-4 h-4 transform translate-x-[-4px] group-hover:translate-x-[0.5px] duration-200" />

<a href="/" class="flex flex-row space-x-2 items-center text-gray-200"></a>

Typeshare

[Join Typeshare](/)
